Jupyter Telemetry Enhancement Proposal (#41)
jupyter/enhancement-proposals: 30-telemetry/proposal.md

| History    | 5 July 2019

## Problem

Telemetry data serves a number of purposes for organizations deploying Jupyter: i) operational monitoring, ii) security monitoring / intrusion detection, iii) compliance auditing, and iv) a-posteriori analysis of the platform’s usage and design–i.e. as a UX research tool. This must be done in a transparent and understandable manner for end-users. Jupyter components and extension developers interested in publishing events must be incentivized to follow the system's interface and patterns rather then rolling out their own.

### Personas

* **Jupyter Users** are the primary stakeholder since it is their data.
* **Jupyter extension developers** will be emitting events from both the server-side and the browser-side code.
* **Jupyter operators** handle the infrastructure deployments and are interested in collecting various bits of events.
* **Analysts** consume the final stored data and visualize and interpret it.

### User Stories

1. As a Jupyter user, I can view and understand the events being collected, so that I have visibility into what information is being collected.

> 2. As a Jupyter user, I need to opt-in to event collection, so that I can choose what data about my usage is gathered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. As a Jupyter user, I may be able to opt-in to event collection, so that I can choose what data about my usage is gathered.
```
Given point 7 I'd change the language of this point otherwise the requirements derived from this point will end up being incompatible with point 7 (which reads like it will require a way to force users to share data (audit trail situation)).

5. As a Jupyter operator, I can write a custom event sink for my deployment, so that I can control where event data is stored.
6. As a Jupyter operator, I can decide what kinds and levels of events are going to be collected and stored.
7. As a Jupyter operator, I can configure opt-in or opt-out for the users in my deployment.
8. As an analyst,  I can clearly tell what the fields in the data represent so that I can interpret and make decisions from that data.

## Proposed Enhancement

The enhancement spans two categories - general concepts applicable across all Jupyter components, and the implementation for each concept for each Jupyter component. This proposal covers the components required to publish and consume discrete events from the various components of the Jupyter ecosystem.

**General concepts:**

* Event schema: The schema for a given event which is respected by all the Jupyter components across the event's lifecycle.
* Event sinks: The "backends" which handle publishing the event to its final storage location.

**Jupyter components:**

* Jupyter server
* JupyterLab
* JupyterHub
* Jupyter Notebook (Classic)

## Detailed Explanation

### Event Schema

> Each event is published conforming a given [JSON schema](https://json-schema.org/) and this is the contract followed by each step in the event lifecycle. These are referred to by all publishers regardless of whether the event comes from the server or the browser.

Reviewer 2: "conforming *to* a given"

]

c.NotebookApp.whitelisted_events = [
    "org.jupyter.someevent"
]
```

#### Core event router

The implementation of the `telemetry.record_event` method which handles

* Schema validation
* Adds event metadata such as `creationTime`
  * We should be able to add more metadata fields in the future if necessary without clashing with any potential schemas that have been defined in the various uses.
* Routing events to configured sinks
* Filters events based on the configuration
* (Optionally) Aggregation and data cleaning.

This part should be scalable to handle the volume of events and implement some sort of pub-sub design pattern.

```python
def record_event(name, schema_version, args):
    # validate schema
    # add metadata
    # get configured sinks
    # send event to sinks
```

#### REST Endpoint

In addition to the above sub-components, a REST interface is exposed on the Jupyter server to allow remote clients and the frontend to publish events into the server. The interface for this is similar to the [Python publisher library](#python-publisher-library)

```json
HTTP PUT /api/telemetry/event
{
    "name" : "org.jupyter.kernel_lifecycle_event",

>     "schema_version : "1",

Reviewer 2: ```"schema_version":```

    "args" : {
        "kernel_name": "python3",
        "state": "restarted"
    }
}
```

#### Open Questions

> 1. Is this work done on the standalone jupyter-server implementation or on the classic jupyter/notebook?

Reviewer 3: I think it should be in the `jupyter/notebook` package for now, since I think that's going to see active use for anywhere between the next 3-5 years.

Reviewer 4: Yeah, there's some effort to port PRs from notebook to jupyter_server in jupyter/jupyter_server#53.

I agree with Yuvi. This should go into notebook and be ported to/mirrored in jupyter_server. I think we're going to be stuck with constantly syncing/porting PRs for awhile.

to do most of its work. They would have interesting events to emit, so we should
make sure they have easy ways to.

#### Spawners, Authenticators & Proxies

Spawners, Authenticators & Proxies run in-process with JupyterHub, and have access to
the JupyterHub `app` object. When they want to emit events, they will:

1. Write schemas for events they want to emit
2. Register their schemas with the with the eventlogging library

   ```python
   self.app.event_log.register_schema
   for schema_file in glob(os.path.join(here, 'event-schemas','*.json')):
      with open(schema_file) as f:
          self.event_log.register_schema(json.load(f))
   ```
3. Emit events wherever they need.

   ```python
   self.app.event_log.record_event('kubespawner.hub.jupyter.org/pod-missing', 1, {
     'pod_name': pod.metadata.name,
     'node': pod.metadata.node
   })
   ```

This would get routed to the appropriate sink if the schema is whitelisted.

#### Services

Services run as their own process, and hence do not have access to the JupyterHub
`app` object. They should use the core eventlogging library directly, and admins
should be able to configure it as they would a standalone application.

> #### Authenticated routing service

Reviewer: This would be a "parallel universe" to https://github.com/jupyter/enhancement-proposals/pull/41/files#diff-5c74b6c64dfb44b841261c64623c9c6eR140 right? As in as an extension I could send events to either of these and they'd end up in the same sinks?

Author: I'm going to defer to @yuvipanda  on the JupyterHub functionality 😃

> Events sent from user's notebook servers or client side interfaces directly to a

Reviewer 2: ``users'``

sink are untrusted - they are from user controlled code & can be anything. It
would be useful to provide a JupyterHub service that can validate that the
users are who they say they are - even though the rest of the event data

> should be considered untrusted.

Reviewer 2: I shouldn't be able to POST without having an auth token.
